TESTING.md, before:

# Testing

Return back to the [README.md](README.md) file.

## Functionality

I manually tested the functionality of the program:

### Intro to Game/Rules and Game or Game

- I made sure that when the program starts, the welcome message is printed and that the user can select to see the rules by pressing R or to start the game and skip the rules by pressing G and in both cases the corresponding screen is printed. Also I tested that whether the user input is not within range or is simply empty, the errors are handled properly. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Rules and Game or Just Game Test](documentation/welcome-rules-screens-test.png)

### Gameplay and Messages

- I tested the gameplay manually, I made sure that the user inputs work, that the logic to hit a hidden ship works and the appropriate emoji is placed on the board as well as the logic to miss with the right emoji on the board. I tested that the corresponding messages "You sunk 1 of my battleships" for a hit, "sorry you missed" for a miss and "you have X missiles remaining" for the amount of turns remaining were working properly. I also made sure that when the user input for row is not within range, when the user input for column is not within range, when row or column or both are left blank (invalid), all these errors are handled accordingly. Lastly as it can be seen in the last four images, I also tested manually that in the case the user repeats their input coordinates for both a hit and a miss, the corresponding "You fired a missile to that coordinate already" message is printed. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Gameplay Test](documentation/gameplay-test.png)

### Win-Lose and Play Again

- By the time the user gets to finish the game, whether it is by winning it or loosing it, a corresponding message is printed for each case and the option to play again or not (end the program) is given to the user. I manually made sure that these features occur without any issues, including the error handling when the choice between "Y" for play again or "N" for no, I don't want to play again, are out of range or left blank (invalid). Please note that to be able to show the screenshot of the winning message on the mock console, the number of turns was increased to 64 to avoid time comsumption waiting for a win, it was then reverted back to 20 for the final version of the game. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Win/Lose Play Again Test](documentation/win-lose-play-again-test.png)

## Browsers Compatibility

- I tested compatibility and functionality across different browsers. I used Chrome, Edge and Firefox, and in every single one of them the program works and responds well. In spite of the emojis being slightly cut in Firefox, the functionality of the game is still optimal.

![Browsers Test](documentation/browsers-test.png)

## Responsiveness

- I manually tested responsiveness with the help of devtools in Chrome, I checked multiple times that the program responds well regardless of the screen size of the device, I tested that no feauture is affected by screen size change. I tested responsiveness starting at 320px wide to 1470px wide and beyond.

![Responsiveness Test](documentation/responsiveness-test.png)

## Code Validation

### Python

I have used the recommended [CI Python Linter](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com) to validate all of my Python files.

| File | CI URL | Raw URL | Combined |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PP3 *run.py* file | `https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/` | `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py` | `https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py` |


![Code Validation](documentation/python-code-validation-pass.png)



Issues resolved using the CI Python Linter:

| File | CI URL | Screenshot | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/e501-line-too-long.png) | E501 line too long |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/noqa-e501-exception.png) | E501 line too long noqa exception |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/w293-blank-line-contains-whitespace.png) | W293 blank line contains whitespace |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/w292-no-newline-end-file.png) | W292 no newline at end of file |

## Defensive Programming

I carried out all tests refering to defensive programming (defensive design). I manually tested and made sure that the user could not break the program regardless of the error caused. The user was always prompted with an appropriate message and the input was requested again.

Python:
- Users must enter a valid letter/word/string when prompted
- Users must choose from a specific list only

![Defensive Programming](documentation/defensive-programming.png)

## Bugs

I encountered five bugs which are listed below:

- Python `E501 line too long` (93 > 79 characters)

    ![line-too-long](documentation/e501-line-too-long.png)

    - To fix this, I pressed enter right after the bracket to ascertain the correct indentation and then I broke the line at a length where it was acceptable for python. The same fix was applied for the rest of the same kind.

- Python `E501 line too long` (131 > 79 characters) noqa exception.

    ![noqa Excepcion](documentation/noqa-e501-exception.png)

    - To fix this, I used the noqa exception. I am aware that this is only valid when there's no other way to fix the issue, on this ocassion the line of code contains variables that are too long and trying to change the single line into several would have caused an error in the code. Besides the one in the screenshoot, there's only one more ocurrence of this instance on line 200 to which the same fix was applied.

    ![noqa Excepcion 2](documentation/noqa-e501-exception-2.png)

- Python `W293 blank line contains whitespace`

    ![Whitespace](documentation/w293-blank-line-contains-whitespace.png)

    - To fix this, I deleted the redundant whitespace.

- Python `W292 no newline at end of file`

    ![New Line End of File](documentation/w292-no-newline-end-file.png)

    - To fix this, I added a new line at the end of the file.

- Python `expected 2 blank lines, found 1` pycodestyle(E302)

    ![Blank Spaces Expected](documentation/blank-spaces-expected.png)

    - To fix this, I added an extra blank line and made sure there were 2 blank lines before any class or function.

## Unfixed Bugs

One unfixed bug remains. In spite of different naive tries to resolve it, I later learned that this is a known issue that occurs in the mock terminal.

- When using the helper `clear()` function, partial text from the rules print, above the height of the terminal does not clear, and remains when you scroll up.

    ![Terminal Not Clear Bug](documentation/partial-rules-message-not-cleared.png)

    - Attempted fix: I tried to adjust the terminal size, but it only resizes the actual terminal, not the allowable area for text.
    - Attempted fix: I tried to call the `clear()` function in different steps of the logic to try and clear the remaining print out, but it still remained.

Commit message:

Update unfixed bugs and code validation sections

TESTING.md, after:

# Testing

Return back to the [README.md](README.md) file.

## Functionality

I manually tested the functionality of the program:

### Game Intro Text > Rules and Game || Game

- I made sure that when the program starts, the welcome message is printed and that the user can select to see the rules by pressing R or to start the game and skip the rules by pressing G and in both cases the corresponding screen is printed. Also I tested that whether the user input is not within range or is simply empty, the errors are handled properly. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Rules and Game or Just Game Test](documentation/welcome-rules-screens-test.png)

### Gameplay and Messages

- I tested the gameplay manually, I made sure that the user inputs work, that the logic to hit a hidden ship works and the appropriate emoji is placed on the board as well as the logic to miss with the right emoji on the board. I tested that the corresponding messages "You sunk 1 of my battleships" for a hit, "sorry you missed" for a miss and "you have X missiles remaining" for the amount of turns remaining were working properly. I also made sure that when the user input for row is not within range, when the user input for column is not within range, when row or column or both are left blank (invalid), all these errors are handled accordingly. Lastly as it can be seen in the last four images, I also tested manually that in the case the user repeats their input coordinates for both a hit and a miss, the corresponding "You fired a missile to that coordinate already" message is printed. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Gameplay Test](documentation/gameplay-test.png)

### Win-Lose && Play Again

- By the time the user gets to finish the game, whether it is by winning it or loosing it, a corresponding message is printed for each case and the option to play again or not (end the program) is given to the user. I manually made sure that these features occur without any issues, including the error handling when the choice between "Y" for play again or "N" for no, I don't want to play again, are out of range or left blank (invalid). Please note that to be able to show the screenshot of the winning message on the mock console, the number of turns was increased to 64 to avoid time comsumption waiting for a win, it was then reverted back to 20 for the final version of the game. Please see image showing the steps taken for said tests in the same order as described.

![Win/Lose Play Again Test](documentation/win-lose-play-again-test.png)

## Browsers Compatibility

- I tested compatibility and functionality across different browsers. I used Chrome, Edge and Firefox, and in every single one of them the program works and responds well. In spite of the emojis being slightly cut in Firefox, the functionality of the game is still optimal.

![Browsers Test](documentation/browsers-test.png)

## Responsiveness

- I manually tested responsiveness with the help of devtools in Chrome, I checked multiple times that the program responds well regardless of the screen size of the device, I tested that no feauture is affected by screen size change. I tested responsiveness starting at 320px wide to 1470px wide and beyond.

![Responsiveness Test](documentation/responsiveness-test.png)

## Code Validation

### Python

I have used the recommended [CI Python Linter](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com) to validate all of my Python files.

This is the completed validated code:

![Code Validation](documentation/python-code-validation-pass.png)



Issues resolved using the CI Python Linter:

| File | CI URL | Screenshot | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/e501-line-too-long.png) | E501 line too long |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/noqa-e501-exception.png) | E501 line too long noqa exception |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/w293-blank-line-contains-whitespace.png) | W293 blank line contains whitespace |
| run.py | [CI PEP8](https://pep8ci.herokuapp.com/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leonardo-simeone/command-line-python-battleship-game/main/run.py) | ![screenshot](documentation/w292-no-newline-end-file.png) | W292 no newline at end of file |

## Defensive Programming

I carried out all tests refering to defensive programming (defensive design). I manually tested and made sure that the user could not break the program regardless of the error caused. The user was always prompted with an appropriate message and the input was requested again.

Python:
- Users must enter a valid letter/word/string when prompted
- Users must choose from a specific list only

![Defensive Programming](documentation/defensive-programming.png)

## Bugs

I encountered five bugs which are listed below:

- Python `E501 line too long` (93 > 79 characters)

    ![line-too-long](documentation/e501-line-too-long.png)

    - To fix this, I pressed enter right after the bracket to ascertain the correct indentation and then I broke the line at a length where it was acceptable for python. The same fix was applied for the rest of the same kind.

- Python `E501 line too long` (131 > 79 characters) noqa exception.

    ![noqa Excepcion](documentation/noqa-e501-exception.png)

    - To fix this, I used the noqa exception. I am aware that this is only valid when there's no other way to fix the issue, on this ocassion the line of code contains variables that are too long and trying to change the single line into several would have caused an error in the code. Besides the one in the screenshoot, there's only one more ocurrence of this instance on line 200 to which the same fix was applied.

    ![noqa Excepcion 2](documentation/noqa-e501-exception-2.png)

- Python `W293 blank line contains whitespace`

    ![Whitespace](documentation/w293-blank-line-contains-whitespace.png)

    - To fix this, I deleted the redundant whitespace.

- Python `W292 no newline at end of file`

    ![New Line End of File](documentation/w292-no-newline-end-file.png)

    - To fix this, I added a new line at the end of the file.

- Python `expected 2 blank lines, found 1` pycodestyle(E302)

    ![Blank Spaces Expected](documentation/blank-spaces-expected.png)

    - To fix this, I added an extra blank line and made sure there were 2 blank lines before any class or function.

## Unfixed Bugs

Two unfixed bugs remain. In spite of different naive tries to resolve it, I later learned that this is a known issue that occurs in the mock terminal.

- When using the helper `clear()` function, partial text from the rules print, above the height of the terminal does not clear, and remains when you scroll up.

    ![Terminal Not Clear Bug](documentation/partial-rules-message-not-cleared.png)

    - Attempted fix: I tried to adjust the terminal size, but it only resizes the actual terminal, not the allowable area for text.
    - Attempted fix: I tried to call the `clear()` function in different steps of the logic to try and clear the remaining print out, but it still remained.

- When a user types `CTRL + C`, the application throws the following error:

    ![CTRL-C Error](documentation/ctrl-c-error.png)

    - This is known issue.
    - Potential fix: I found a potential fix for the issue [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/1112350), but due to time limitations I was not able to attemp it yet.

Return back to the [README.md](README.md) file.
